wed Axioms


> Axiom - an established rule or principle or a self-evident truth

## 1: The United States is the most powerful country in the world

So much is perception rather than reality. When Nixon finally abandoned the US Dollar gold peg in 1973 a devaluation event did occur, but the dollar ultimately retained it's reserve currency status. The value of a dollar it was argued, rather than being convertible to real money and thus deriving its value accordingly, was implicitly backed by the power of the United States' industrial and military might. There remained a perception, which exists to this day, that the US dollar is worth something, a fact evidenced by the dollarisation of a number of economies around the world as well as many transactions around the globally still being settled in greenbacks from real estate to the international commodity markets. A one dollar note is in actuality nothing but a piece of paper, which represents a claim on nothing, and is only as valuable as what it can be exchanged for, which is entirely dependent on what the receiver of your dollars perceives those same dollars can be further exchanged for.

Inflation was a persistent theme both leading up to the abandonment of the gold standard as well as in the years afterwards. Only once Paul Vaulker was appointed to the Federal Reserve and implemented short-term interest rates of almost 20% did inflation subside. Yet the fact that such interest rate policy could even be sustained by the United States economy is testament to its fundamental strength at that time. Unemployment spiked to 11%, but the persistent inflation abated. Vaulker's policy remains applauded among Austrian economists to this day - notably Vaulker was appointed by a Democratic President, although reinstated for a second term by Reagan. Ultimately, the perception of US strength was well founded at the time. The situation in the world in April 2022 is vastly different.

> "There are decades where nothing happens; and there are weeks where decades happen" - Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.

Like the city of Hong Kong, so much of the West's perceived greatness are vestiges of a another, ever distant era. As Ray Dalio points out, in the later stages of the cycle, a nation that was once great still perceives itself to be great and maintains its military spending and approximate standard of living through increasing debt levels and money printing rather than through productivity gains and savings that initially brought economic surpluses that afforded it those same privileges. In March of 2022, the US Consumer Prices Index stood at 8.4%, while interest rates stood at 0.25%. The markets speculate a series of rate rises in the short and medium term, but even the most "hawkish" commentators don't put the accumulated rate cycle top above the current CPI. Unlike in the 1970's and 80's, the US economy has record debt at both Federal and Municipal government levels, meaning that even modest interest rate levels - by historical standards - would force politically untenable spending cuts as the proportion of interest expense relative to tax receipts grows.

In the first quarter of 2022 the US' economy contracted by 1.4%. Unfortunately, this figure comes at the - supposed - beginning of the interest rate cycle. For reference, the Chinese economy grew at 4.8% over the same period, and, - shockingly for some - the Russian economy grew by 3.7%. Germany's economy grew by 0.2%. The US economy is still regarded officially as the largest economy in the world on a nominal basis. The unique ability of the US - bestowed upon it by the US Dollar reserve currency status - to print and export vast amounts of its own currency is a privilege consistently abused throughout history by all who have possessed this superpower. Cracks are beginning to show, evidenced by the weaponisation of the dollar, prompting central banks around the world to engage with China to establish RMB denominated trade. Israel has added the RMB to it's reserves while Saudi Arabia looks to trade its oil for the Chinese currency.

In order to diminish the prospects of challengers to US hegemony, or to put "allies" in their place, nominal GDP is used as the preferred measure with which to compare the US economy to others. While such figures make Boomers feel warm and fuzzy, PPP comparisons are in reality more relevant. On a PPP basis, China is already 20% larger than the US in terms of GDP. Russia's economy is larger than the UK's but smaller than Germany's and Indonesia is the 7th largest in the world. PPP is more relevant in the current situation because it reflects what a country can actually afford in the event of a military conflict. For example, China can produce more military equipment at lower costs than can the US, and this is reflected in its PPP basis GDP of US$ 30 trn compared to the US's US $25 trn. It also goes some way to explaining why Russia, often referred to as having an "economy the size of New York State" is able to sustain a conflict. Germany and Japan are significantly larger economies when measured in PPP terms.

Ultimately, while the US is still powerful, it is a declining power and has already been surpassed by China on a PPP basis in economic terms. Militarily, the messy retreat from Afghanistan and growing internal divisions may betray an unwillingness to fight in costly wars, especially in far off places. If true, this significantly diminishes the US' ability to defend vassal states such as Australia and Taiwan, a fact - which if confirmed - would further damage the perception of US power. Much like Thailand - from where I am writing this - has throughout its history, countries around the world would quickly look to adapt to the emerging order of the world and dump their dollars in the process.  

## 2: The West is Free

Boomers love to pontificate on China's inevitable decline. Maybe they are right, although their obsession that a system wherein the people are so "suppressed" is doomed to fail is indeed a thesis unlikely to stand up to historical scrutiny. There have, after all, been many highly oppressive empires that were also unimaginably successful. Further undermining the Boomers self-comforting arguments is the precarious situation within the societies in which they themselves reside. Denouncing far off lands to which they have never been as "authoritarian" while double-masked and adhering to the latest government covid decree.

That so many consider foreign media as "propaganda" - once again, maybe they are right - while not questioning the sincerity of the narrative pounded into our collective ears is a point of significant concern. Every empire worth it's salt exhibits a halfway decent ability to manipulate the masses through education and mass media. Yet while many Western countries did at some point or another, generally agree that voicing one's opinion was reasonable, such a consensus seems no longer to prevail. Societies change over time, eventually new rules are considered acceptable. Too question the narrative now comes not with the possibility of upsetting someone, but now of being an outcast within your own society. The very meaning of Democracy has morphed into a type of mob rule, which allows for the censorship of ideas to be achieved subtly and pre-determined decisions to be made under the guise of free will.

For example, my own home country of Australia appears no longer to possess any level of freedom in meaningful areas of its foreign policy. The incumbent government engages weekly in insults against our largest trading partner and increasing discussions of "preparing for war". It would be pointless to elaborate on the futility of any war against China from the standpoint of Australia. China's largest city has approximately the same population as the whole of Australia after all. We also rely on Chinese imports in many facets of life. There is little debate on who the enemy is, but an abundance of statements on what the government will do about it for use.

Mostly, the argument goes "China is evil, and suppresses their people's rights". This is possibly true. However, almost all examples of Chinese authoritarianism have parallels in the West. China's brutal lockdowns exhibited only marginally less compassion than those in Melbourne. Australia did after all prevent its own citizens from leaving or returning for almost two years. No such policy existed in China to my knowledge, with PRC friends of mine in Singapore and HK reacting with shock at the average Australian's inability to leave. New Zealand's border closures were subsequently deemed illegal by the courts - whatever that means. Over time, the political keywords in Australia have changed from everyone having "a fair go" - which one could also extend to having a fair go at the argument - to "keeping Australians safe".

It would appear, an Orwellian future of perpetual war and fear awaits us. But this is just political, so let's just give up our political rights and enjoy life right? Perhaps, but anyone who has travelling knows that Western countries are not where one goes to find freedoms in business or lifestyle. Riding around Penang on a rented motorcycle in a race against the incoming thunderstorm is one of my fondest memories of Malaysia, and yet one entirely impossible in Australia.

The regimented, closed-minded routine of many Westerners that passes as freedom.
