It's been a little while since my last post. On the 13th of December I boarded an Australian repatriation flight from Frankfurt, Germany direct to Darwin, in Australia's Northern Territory. The subsequent two weeks spent in government quarantine was not all bad. Sure, spending Christmas confined to a single room without a drop of Bavarian beer or family around was tough, but fortunately, there were some good lads in my block that I could chat with on breaks between coding my current business project. In fact, waiting out the two weeks at the periphery of the country had a calming effect, and was in stark contrast to previous arrivals in the motherland that can only be described as fleeting and rushed. Having lived in Germany the last two years, it feels good to be back home, albeit not on the terms I had imagined. Since being discharged from the government's mandatory quarantine facility, and afforded some degree of freedom, I have repaired my 1994 Nissan Silvia, and settled into a short term apartment with my brother in the down but not out Docklands area of Melbourne. We work long hours on the business and have achieved a number of significant milestones. Today is the first day I've taken off for 4 months. 

Leaving Australia is currently prohibited, though my residence abroad would probably exempt me from this draconian overstep by the Australian government should I feel a strong enough desire to escape. Given the state of the world however, such drastic measures do not feature in my immediate plans, although it would be appreciated if the Prime Minister would not poke the Chinese bull, or Google for that matter, lest we end up invaded - or perhaps worse - without access to google search. I am not done with the adventures though, and have been thinking about a big trip through a country that has always fascinated me - but that's a topic for another time.

While Qantas - the flight carrier mandated by the government for the repatriation flights - could not have been less enthused about its task, I do commend in every way the professionalism and hard work exhibited by the flight crew. Australia has been commended throughout the world for its response to the pandemic, and it is undeniable that there have been far fewer cases here than elsewhere. Depending on your political allegiance, this is a fortunate consequence of our either fortunate or unfortunate following of our Chinese overlords. While the virus may have originated from the mainland, China has also shown the world how to quash its spread, an approach that Australia has largely emulated.

It would however be difficult to imagine a less coordinated, less effective approach than that has prevailed within the union of European nations. Do not take this statement as criticism however, the point of this post is to express how grateful I am for what Europe, and particularly Germany, have taught me over the years.

Germany and Australia are in many ways complete opposites. Australia is an island that tolerates its neighbours, Germany is landlocked and shares borders with nine European countries. [Germany](https://oec.world/en/profile/country/deu) is a high-tech economy with motorcars & caravans (10.9%), chassis, bodies, engines for motor vehicles (6.7%) and pharmaceutical products (6.27%) making up the countries top three exports. [Australia](https://oec.world/en/profile/country/aus) on the other hand manufactures almost nothing but rather extracts and exports raw materials with minerals (33%), ore, slag and ash (24%) and precious stones, pearls, metals (7.07%) making up its top three exports. More than a third of Australian exports are tied to China, Germany on the other hand benefits from a well balanced distribution of export partners. Australia has until recently always been on the 'Winning' team, Germany's false start last century left the country and its neighbours in ruin on multiple occasions, with the continent enduring unspeakable suffering, something that remains heavy in the population's psyche, and the ramifications of which are still felt between the east and west today.

All of this is well and good. That's history after all, and sure the economies are different, but this is more a result of economic realities and pragmatism than anything else. I will never understand Germany the way a German does, just as someone who grows up outside of Australia won't understand Australia the way I do. But I did learn the language, I did spend significant stints there over the last 17 years, and there is always that 1786 Scots language poem by Robert Burns to remind us of the advantage of being an outsider. The standard English version being:

*Oh, would some Power give us the gift
To see ourselves as others see us!
It would from many a blunder free us,
And foolish notion:
What airs in dress and gait would leave us,
And even devotion!*

The differences between Australia and Germany are far more profound and nuanced than those mentioned afore. In the end, Germany did succumb to imposing harsh, unforgiving restrictions upon its citizens under the pretence of combating the pandemic. My point is not to argue that this is right or wrong, but rather that it was different. No matter which side of the debate you are on, I hope you agree that it is acceptable to have a debate. In my view, the human costs of the restrictions that have been ushered in more than warrant such a debate, and Germany had that debate. Early in the crisis, I was surprised at the massive crowds that appeared in Munich's *Marienplatz* in opposition to the local state governments restrictions. These protests seemed like an overreaction to me, knowing that in Australia the measures were more far-reaching and more outrageous. A few months later, far larger demonstrations swept the country with protesters [attempting to storm the *Reichstag*](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-53964147) (parliament building) in Berlin. Ironically, it is the Germans who are stereo-typically known for their blind obedience, and Australians for their rebelliousness. We are all ex-convicts after all right? 

One of Australia's most endearing qualities is the average citizens problem with authority. Anyone who knows Australia knows our egalitarian 'fair go' approach that surpassed class and demographic divides. Sure, it might not always be as much of a reality as we may like to think, but it is a thing. And yet, when I think about Australia today, what of that rebelliousness? It is prohibited to ride a bicycle without a helmet, the speed limit is 80 km/h on Melbourne's four lane Monash freeway and the sensationalist media would have you think that Europe will be a continent empty of civilisation post the pandemic, when in reality, the deaths, while tragic, represent a minuscule percentage of the more than 500 million people who live on the old continent. In fact while Australian news reported about a Europe on the brink, borders were in fact open and many Germans were enjoying their summer holidays like it was just another year. 

It is for this reason that I owe a great deal of thanks and gratitude to Germany and to Europe. While the bureaucracy, corruption and apparent incompetence of authorities there frustrated me at times, it is only with the benefit of hindsight that I realise how much weight is given to the implications of each encroachment upon the rights of citizens. Often this indecisiveness results in worse policy outcomes, such as the migrant crisis, or the ongoing economic malaise, and arguably the current pandemic. But at its core, it comes from the right place and with at least some consideration given to its people, some of the time. 

Germany is a fascinating country of castles, cobble-stone streets and reasonableness.  Its language reflects the directness of its culture, much as Australian English increasingly reflects our desperate want to avoid any tough topic with an unbearably fake friendliness. It is my home away from home and I will always be grateful for the wisdom and knowledge I have garnered from my time there with its people. 



still to mention

- Australians stuck abroad
- australians pissed off at flight crews
- no internationals this year